docs: typescript usage information (#5622)
winglang/wing: docs/docs/09-typescript/02-inflights.md

---
title: Inflight Functions
id: inflights
---

The concepts of `preflight` and `inflight` in winglang are described [here](../02-concepts/01-preflight-and-inflight.md).

> In TypeScript, this is analogous to the difference between the `main` function (`preflight`) and the `inflight` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In TypeScript, this is analogous to the difference between the `main` function (preflight) and the `inflight` function.
```

### Functions and `inflight`

> Some resources, like `cloud.Function`, run code in the cloud. This code is an `inflight`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some resources, like `cloud.Function`, run code in the cloud. This code is called an *inflight closure*.
```

> To create an `inflight` in TypeScript, you can use the `inflight` function and pass it an async closure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create an inflight closure in TypeScript, you can use the `inflight()` function and pass it an async closure:
```

```ts
import { main, cloud, inflight } from "@wingcloud/framework";

> main((root) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main(root => {
```

  new cloud.Function(
    root,
    "MyFn",
    inflight(async () => {
      // This code runs in the deployed cloud function
      return "Wing!";
    })
  );
});
```

> ### `lift`ing `inflight`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Lifting objects into inflight closures
```

Author: It was a little bit too cute

> `inflight`s do not run in the same environment as the rest of the code, so you can't just reference variables from the outside.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inflight closures do not run in the same environment as the rest of the code, so you can't just reference variables from the outside.
```

(I would say there's no need to backtick every time we mention the term inflight, only when it refers to the actual code symbol)

> The `lift` function ensures you have an interface with the data you need. This includes `inflight`-specific APIs for some resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `lift()` function ensures you have an interface with the data you need. This includes the inflight APIs for the lifted resources:
```

Style: I like to add `()` when I refer to symbols that are functions.

```ts
import { main, cloud, lift } from "@wingcloud/framework";

> main((root) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main(root => {
```

  const bucket = new cloud.Bucket(root, "MyBucket");
  const plainData = "Wing!";

  new cloud.Function(
    root,
    "MyFn",
    lift({ bucket, plainData }).inflight(async ({ bucket, plainData }) => {

>       await bucket.put("hello.txt", plainData);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // note that inflight methods are always asynchronous
      await bucket.put("hello.txt", plainData);
```

      return plainData;
    })
  );
});
```

> `inflight`s themselves can also be lifted. Once lifted, they can be called like normal function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inflight closures themselves can also be lifted. Once lifted, they can be called like normal closure:
```

```ts
import { main, lift } from "@wingcloud/framework";

> main((root) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main(root => {
```

  const myInflight = inflight(async () => {
    return "Wing!";
  });

  lift({ myInflight }).inflight(async ({ myInflight }) => {
    return myInflight();
  });
});
```

> Regular functions and classes cannot be lifted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normal functions and classes cannot be lifted.
```

> Unlike other variable, imports can be referenced inflight as-is. The imports will be brought to the inflight's environment when bundled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike other variable, imports can be referenced as-is from within inflight closures. The imports will be bundled into the inflight's environment.
```

```ts
import { main, inflight } from "@wingcloud/framework";
import assert from "node:assert";

> main((root) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main(root => {
```

  inflight(async () => {
    assert.equal(1, 1);
  });
});
```

### Permissions

> When `lift` is used with resources, permissions are granted automatically to access them in the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `lift()` is used with resources, permissions are granted automatically to access them in the cloud.
```

By default, these permissions are permissive and allow all actions on the resource.

> To restrict the permissions, use the `grant` method after `lift`ing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To restrict the permissions, chain `grant()` calls to your `lift()`:
```

```ts
import { main, cloud, lift } from "@wingcloud/framework";

> main((root) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main(root => {
```

  const bucket = new cloud.Bucket(root, "MyBucket");

  cloud.Function(
    root,
    "MyFn",
    lift({ bucket })
      .grant({ bucket: ["get"] })
      .inflight(async ({ bucket }) => {
        await bucket.put("hello.txt", "Wing!");
        //           ^^^ Type error, no `put` permissions!
        return "Wing!";
      })
  );
});
```

### Testing

> `wing test` runs all tests within your `main`. To define a test, use the `test` function provided as the second argument to `main`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`wing test` runs all tests within your `main`. To define a test, use the `test()` function provided as the second argument to `main`:
```

```ts
import { main, cloud, inflight, lift } from "@wingcloud/framework";
import assert from "node:assert";

> main((root, test) => {

Reviewer: is it possible to just expose `test` as a global function from `@wingcloud/framework`?

Author: Yes, however I chose not to for 2 reasons:

1. If the function is global, it would require you to attach a scope. I find this kinda annoying and leaky.
2. Putting it inside `main()` forces it to work like wing's `test` because it's telling the user that tests must work through an entrypoint.

(1) is not a big deal to me, but (2) felt important. When we rework testing to have like we've talked about a few times I think I'd rather change it to a global.
